Good morning. Good morning.
Nice to see you again.
Alright, well welcome along to the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee, your excellency, great
to have you here in New Zealand with us.
Uh, we are live streaming this session as we do
with our public hearings,
and we have half an hour sit down
for this morning's, uh, discussion.
We've received a hard copy of your presentation.
Thank you for sending that through. Wonderful.
And we would welcome your comments to speak to that.
And then I'm sure there'll be questions from committee
members as well. I
Hope so. Thank you. Over
To you. Well, first of
all, thank you very much for having me.
Thank you for taking the time and, uh, I had the pleasure
and honor of, uh, meeting you
and when you are in Canberra, so I look forward to,
uh, our discussion.
Thank you. So it's, it's a great honor
to appear before this committee,
and I sincerely thank you for the opportunity
to engage in a dialogue with New Zealand's Parliament's
parliament on Morocco's vision, our regional role,
and the prospects for deeper cooperation
between our two countries.
Although geographically distant Morocco
and New Zealand share essential values, respect
for international law, commitment to multilateralism,
openness to trade, and a deep belief in
sustainable development.
These shared principles form a strong
foundation for partnership.
Morocco has always considered New Zealand a longstanding
friend, yet despite this goodwill, our bilateral relations,
whether political, parliamentary,
or economic, deserve to be strengthened through regular
exchanges and structured strategic dialogue.
I fully understand the tyray of distance geo
geography in inevitably shapes perceptions,
but distance should not prevent engagement,
especially when Morocco plays an active role in areas
that matter to New Zealand.
Counter-terrorism, energy transition, food security,
and regional stability.
There is a clear political will in Morocco
to deepen our relationship with New Zealand.
Today, I wish to demonstrate why Morocco can be a strategic
partner for your country
and why the time has come to elevate our relationship.
So why Morocco?
Morocco is a politically stable country anchored in
continuous reform.
Our 2011 con constitution expanded rights
to strengthen decentralization
and consolidated democratic governance.
It it reflects a long-term vision based on stability,
inclusion, and institutional resilience.
Our national identity is plural
and inclusive it in it, it integrates Arab Amazi,
Saharan African, and delusion Jewish
and Mediterranean components.
Morocco is the only Arab country to have a Jewish museum,
and we officially recognize the Shoah.
One of his Majesty's closest advisors, Mr.
Andre Azule, is Jewish.
Diversity in Morocco is not symbolic.
It is aru, it is structural and lived in a fragmented
and volatile region.
Morocco acts as a stability anchor
and a bridge between north and south Europe
and Africa, the Atlantic, and the Mediterranean.
We are also active.
We are also an active counter-terrorism partner.
Robot hosts the United Nations office for counterterrorism,
where Australia is already engaged.
Morocco's approach is holistic,
combining security prevention, religious moderat,
re moderation, rehabilitation
and integration, particularly
through the Mohammedi Institute for the training of Imams,
Modi, and Morida,
and the Muha program, which means reconciliation.
Morocco itself was a victim of terrorism in 2003
and 2011.
Tragic events such as Christchurch
or Bond Bondi remind us that terrorism is global
distance does not shield any nation.
Morocco's experience in promoting moderate Islam
and co combating extreme can be
of concrete relevance to New Zealand.
Over the past two decades,
Morocco has undergone a profound economic transformation.
We have built a diversified industrial base in automotive,
manufacturing, aerospace, agri industry,
and advanced logistics.
Morocco's now a regional manufacturing
and export hub connecting Europe, Africa, and the Atlantic.
This transformation is underpinned
by world class infrastructure.
The port of Tan Med is today the leading port in the
Mediterranean and in Africa, ranking
among the top global hubs for container traffic
and logistics performance.
18. It anchors industrial ecosystems in automotive
and aerospace manufacturing
and connects Morocco to more than 180 ports worldwide.
In the south. The development
of DLA embodies forward-looking vision.
DLA is emerging as a strategic Atlantic gateway,
combining logistics, fisheries, renewable energy
and agribusiness in positioning the region in a bridge
between North and West Africa and the wider Atlantic space.
Morocco's attractiveness is also driven
by its trade a, uh, architecture.
The kingdom has concluded preferential trade agreements
with 62 countries, including the European Union,
the United States, Turkey, and many African
and Arab partners.
This network offers companies based in Morocco privilege
access to a market of over 1 billion
consumers making Morocco a highly competitive export
platform in energy.
Morocco is a pioneer.
The Nor solar complex is one of the largest in the world.
We are Africa's leader in wind energy
and have a set ambitious target, 52% of electricity
by 2030.
Right now we are at 47%.
Morocco is also positioning itself as if future green
hy hydrogen hub, leveraging its solar
and wind potential, its ports
and its proximity to major markets
and area of di direct strategic
relevance For New Zealand's own energy transition
and climate objectives.
Morocco is deeply anchored in Africa.
We are the first investors in West Africa,
and the second across the continent with strong
and growing f footprints in banking, telecommunications,
energy, and agriculture.
With more than 100 companies, Moroccan banks,
telecom operators, energy companies
and agribusiness firms are now present throughout Africa.
OCP are, are, um, company for phosphates,
uh, operates in 12 countries playing a central role in food
security and sustainable agriculture.
Morocco, uh, uh, detaining more than 70%
of world reserves in phosphates.
A flagship project illustrating this vision is the Nigeria
Morocco gas pipeline.
Spanning 13 countries
will serve over 400 million people enable industrialization
and foster regional integration across West
Africa and beyond.
These initiatives are part of a broader vision for Africa
and the Atlantic space.
His majesty, the king, has launched strategic
initiatives aimed at transforming the Atlantic facade
of Africa into a new quarter of development, connectivity,
and shared prosperity.
This Atlantic initiative seeks
to give Landlock Sahil countries access to the ocean,
facilitate trade routes, and has energy
and digital connectivity,
and promote development across West Africa
through these royal initiatives.
Morocco is positioning itself, not merely
as an African actor,
but as an Atlantic gateway linking Africa with Europe
and the Americas, and offering partners a stable,
predictable and forward looking platform for engagement
with political stability and a legal economic framework.
Modern infrastructure Morocco stands in as an ideal platform
for Africa bound investment
for partners seeking a strategic entry point into a rapidly
transforming continent.
Morocco and New Zealand established diplomatic relations
in 1976.
This being our 50th year, we share a strong attachment
to multilateralism openness and sustainability.
Yet trade volumes remain limited.
There is no structured economic framework
and political dialogue is modest.
The potential is largely untapped.
Morocco can become New Zealand's gateway to Africa.
New Zealand currently has only three, uh, uh,
embassies on the continent, Ethiopia,
South Africa, and Egypt.
Opening a presence in Morocco would give New Zealand
strategic reach across North and West Africa.
What are the priority, uh, areas
for cooperation can include sustainable agriculture
and agritech water management
and resilience, renewable energy, green hydrogen education,
research, and innovation.
Morocco also offers platforms such as the siam,
the International Agricultural Fair,
and Halles, which connect global partners
to African markets, particularly in AgriFood and Fisheries.
Singapore offers an instructive comparison
with a population quite similar to New Zealand.
It engages far more with Morocco leveraging its it
as a gateway to Africa in digital systems capacity building,
agri trade, and sustainable technologies.
The Sahara issue is a sweet, generous case,
unique in nature and context.
Historically, the Sahara Tribes pledge allegiance
to the Moroccan Sultan.
The green March of 1975 peacefully
reaffirmed this reality.
The Moroccan Sahara Bear bears no comparison
with other territorial situations such as talal.
It concerns Morocco sovereignty and territorial integrity.
On October 31st, 2025,
the UN Security Council adopted resolution 27 97
renewing mineo
and reaffirming the autonomy plan presented
by Morocco in 2007 as the basis
for a political solution under Moroccan sovereignty.
The referendum option is obsolete since 25 years.
Uh, it has not been mentioned at the UN General Assembly
for the past 25 years.
The cons, the Security Council consistently calls
for a realistic, pragmatic,
and durable solution based on compromise.
More than 120 countries now support the
Moroccan autonomy plan.
24 of the 27 EU countries, over two thirds
of the African countries, all the Gulf states, the majority
of the Latin and the Caribbean countries,
three permanent members of the Security Council,
the United States, France, and the uk.
Beyond the political, political dimension,
this dispute also has a growing security dimension.
The prio operates in a highly fragile,
salient environment marked by terrorism, trafficking
and organized crime.
There is increasing concern about the intersection
between separatist, militancy
and extremist networks in the region.
Even more troubling are documented practices in the T do
camps, including the militarization of children,
ideological indoctrination,
and restrictions In freedom of movement.
These practices are incompatible
with international humanitarian standards
and the convention on the rights of the child.
In contrast, the Moroccan Sahara is experiencing tangible
development, high electoral participation, full integration,
international institution, major infrastructure
and social development,
and nearly 30 foreign consulates opened in the region.
We have prepared a detailed fact sheet for you,
which you have here.
And as represented representatives of a principled
and pragmatic country, we respectfully invite New Zealand
to reassess its position in light of international momentum,
regional security realities
and its own law-based diplomacy, a balanced position such as
that of the United Kingdom would consolidate New Zealand's
credibility within the Commonwealth support un efforts
for peaceful conflict resolution, contribute
to stability in a region directly affected by terrorism,
and encourage closer cooperation with Morocco.
This is not only a territorial issue,
it's also a about regional stability, human dignity,
and preventing new fault lines in an already fragile
Sahel environment.
Morocco and New Zealand share a commitment
to international law and pragmatic multilateralism.
Morocco offers stability, vision,
and responsibility in a complex region.
New Zealand embodies in principled
and forward-looking depl diplomacy in Indo-Pacific.
Together we can bring, build a bridge between Africa,
the Indo-Pacific, creating a platform
for South south cooperation
and our strength, our complimentary, our values converge,
and the the time has come to elevate our relationship.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much, ambassador.
Appreciate your insights into, uh, Morocco
and also the New Zealand Moroccan relationship.
I'm sure there'll be questions from members, um,
but I might just start off with one, if I may.
I'm really interested in the, uh,
Atlantic Initiative mm-hmm.
The pipeline work. I wonder if you could perhaps expand
a bit more on that for us.
Yes. Um, with regards to the Atlantic Initiative, uh,
there are two initiatives.
The one that gives the landlocked saal countries going from
Chad Ni, Burkina Faso, uh, Mali, uh,
giving them access to the Atlantic,
that's one of the initiatives.
So they can facilitate, facilitate trade,
and the one bringing together all of the African countries
that have a, an Atlantic coast to promote trade,
uh, amongst them.
And also that would encourage trade
with the countries from the other side of the Atlantic.
So that is our,
and we are building, Morocco now is building, uh, a second
big, uh, port in dla.
So that will also facilitate that trade.
So our approach, it had his majesty has a vision
and that the vision is to promote trade.
That is the problem with the African countries, is we need
to inter trade between amongst us,
but also with other continents.
And how long has that initiative been in place?
Oh, uh, I think, well, we're, we're working on it. Yes.
We have signed the landlocked, uh, uh, with the, uh,
landlocked countries, and we are working with the Atlantic.
So it started about two, two and a half years ago.
So it's in progress.
Great initiative. Yes. Uh, look,
thank you very much, ambassador.
And and welcome to the side Tasman. Thank you.
Um, I mean, there, there are so much potential, I guess,
for us to grow, um, our relationships,
but I mean, our dependence upon Morocco, um, is huge.
And that is the phosphate Yes. Or supply. Mm-hmm.
And, and The, um, you know, the controversial issues
of, of autonomy
and the ones that you've raised are quite critical.
That is the resolution of those to ensure
that we have an ongoing supply of phosphate.
So maybe an update.
Um, and, and I know from time to time our companies,
our two major fertilizer companies get caught in crossfire.
The farmers, uh, who rely on it,
and they probably don't understand the
importance of Morocco to them.
But, um, giving some assurances to the progress
of this difficult situation.
We, we appreciate, it's not simple.
Um, I know you've referred to it,
but maybe a bit of an update on, on whether
the commercial connections mm-hmm.
Who access that phosphate are reasonably secure
or what is likely to interfere with that.
Well, see, the problem is, is
because you are not very well informed of the Sahara issue,
you have a few people manipulating
and just promoting false, uh, statements.
That's the thing. You have to understand that, uh,
the phosphates in the, in the Sahara represent only 2%.
It's only 2%.
So, uh, what we are asking of close
To 50% of our phosphate
From the, no, not from the South, not from the Sahara,
Not from the Sahara.
Carry on. Sorry. Thank you.
So, but anyway, the, the, the issue here is not that,
the issue here is that what we would like
to see is we would like New Zealand to, uh,
revise its position in accordance
to the un political process.
We are not asking here for recognition.
Uh, we cannot impose that, of course, on any country.
But what we can convince you to do is to align
with the un peace process.
That is, I mean, and,
and I have illustrated it here with a number of countries.
The last resolution, China didn't veto,
Russia didn't veto.
So we're moving in that direction.
So why is it taking so much time, uh, just,
you know, endorse the, the un political process.
That's all that we are asking
for if you want this issue to move forward. Okay.
Thank you. Look, sorry. Uh, yeah.
Tim Costley? Yes. Um,
Ambassador, thank you.
I was really interested in your trade. Mm-hmm.
Um, figures.
And I, and I'm just wondering, what,
what is that a basis of?
Is that, that you have just really captured your
geographical position at sort of the entrance
to the Mediterranean, a bit like Singapore did in the, in,
in the Southeast and, and,
and you've sort of, um, been able to leverage the, the,
the strength of your geography?
Or is it, you know, are you acting more as a hub
for the wider region or is it a,
or is it a reflection of the amount of trade that Morocco
as a country is doing? Can you just,
Yes. Let me give you some
examples.
Um, Morocco has, uh,
started, uh, we, we don't have gas.
We don't have oil. So, so we had to be innovative
and, uh, in order for, for us to develop our country,
and, uh, and this has started many decades ago,
we have very high skilled labor.
We have more than half a million children in, uh, in,
um, vocational training.
Uh, we have, for example, we have 80
Japanese countries operating from Morocco.
We export almost 1 million cars a year.
We have 250 companies in the aerospace, aeronautics sector.
Every plane that is flying today has at least 10, 10% of,
uh, its parts are made in Morocco.
So yes, they are made in Morocco.
We have the largest, and you being an agricultural country,
we have the largest, uh, uh,
exhibit agricultural and agritech and agribusiness exhibit.
We would love to see New Zealand be present
because it brings together more than 70 countries.
So it would be a perfect platform to promote what ha uh,
what New Zealand has to promote in terms
of machinery experience.
You have so much to offer
and it will open doors for you in Africa
because more than 25 African countries take part in
that, in that exhibit.
Hmm. And we have the same for fishing
and fisheries, also with your coastlines.
So I can understand, uh, what I think we need to do is
to move forward, but in an incremental manner.
We need to target. So by targeting, for example, these two,
I'm sure you can get a lot out of it.
Another thing, uh, of course we have mining
or mining destination.
Last year we received 2012, 20 million tourists.
Uh, so, uh, we're doing, we, we hosted the African Cup.
We're going to co-host the World Cup.
So we have also invested a lot in sports. Hmm.
Uh, we can exchange of experiences, we can do that.
Uh, so we are, we provide Spain
with almost 50% of its, uh, fruits and vegetables.
We're an agricultural country. Yeah.
Um, we export a lot of the,
the red fruits also from all over.
Uh, the UK was the first, uh, Morocco was the first country
to sign a trade agreement with the UK post Brexit.
And our trade has been going up, uh, I mean consistently.
So there are a lot of opportunities,
and you have to keep in mind that Africa is the future.
So Morocco provides that base in terms
of security infrastructure,
and you can, many companies work from use Morocco to work
and reach out to other African countries.
And that's why I believe that a country like New Zealand,
I understand the, the, for budget constraints, uh,
I have brought that up about opening an embassy,
but I think it could in the near future be, uh,
something that you would really need
to think about. Seriously.
Thank you very much. Good. Look,
Thank you, investor. And
just, just following on, I, I agree with you.
I think Africa is the future,
and I think it is, it's a, um, it's a,
we way from New Zealand and,
and the viewers that, you know,
there are budgetary constraints and we have to prioritize.
But I think it is time for us to,
to look more closely at Africa.
I guess the question of where we should base our,
we have some good connections in Algeria and,
and some other, other countries, South Africa.
Um, but what would Morocco offer by way of, um,
I guess direct assistance, um, for New Zealand work
to set up a base for agritech development,
agricultural development, and,
and I guess an expansion of an African strategy?
Well, we have agencies that do that are in charge of that.
And Australia has been doing a lot.
Let me give you an example.
And I think we need to be more innovative
and creative in how we do business.
It's not a question of just selling and buying,
but Australia, for example, I don't know if you know Costco,
blueberries and Mountain Blue, because it's a fragile fruit.
They are producing it in Morocco
and exporting it from Morocco
because of our FTAs be they sell to the United States
because we have an FTA with, we are the only African country
to have an FTA with the United States.
That's to sell to the Arab world, to sell to Europe, the uk.
So we have to see, I, I believe that you should come up
with proposals and then we can fine tune it.
We can, you know, tailor it to
how it could be more, most successful and in Morocco.
Good pitch. Yeah,
We'll probably into that. And another
thing, I think it, another example in terms
of education also, of course,
how many students can you bring here?
That's very difficult.
But do you know that we have more than 17,000 African
students studying in Morocco, more than 17,000.
So why not maybe have, uh, open a campus,
work with another university
and bring your know-how, you know, your experience, uh, your
education, put it there.
We have many countries that are doing that from the uk,
United States, from Canada, from France, from Europe.
So, uh, that's another possibility.
So we need to, you know, work with more imagination.
I, I feel there's a need for us to go
and investigate. Yeah.
Well, you know what I would say,
and another thing, uh, you know, Morocco, the role
that we play in as trying to, to,
uh, promote peace.
Also, our king is the chair of the, uh,
Jerusalem committee.
So we have, Morocco has always played a, an,
an important role in, uh, in the,
the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
We have always tried to, to promote peace,
because I think Morocco has always had a,
a good relationship with, with, uh, with, uh, the state
of Israel and with, uh, the role that we play
and the Palestinian cause we have always Morocco,
it's has always been a king who has been the chair
of the Ktz committee.
And we have done a lot in the Gaza.
We've built schools, hospitals,
and we have summer camps for children.
They come to Morocco for summer camps,
but it's just not something that we go talk about.
I can vouch for the quality of the adventure,
motorbike riding in Morocco.
We believe in a two state solution,
and that's what we are promoting.
Very good. Any final questions for the ambassador?
Ambassador? We really appreciate you taking the time to
Thank You. Visit us
from Australia. Thank
You. Um,
And to share some more insights about Morocco.
It was really interesting to learn a bit more about the
leadership role you play in Africa in particular.
Yeah. And some of the initiatives that they had. Mm-hmm.
From the trade perspective too,
it was really good, fascinating work.
Um, and, you know,
appreciate the potential you've highlighted for us
to deepen our relationship.
Um, you'll be aware, I'm sure that we did, uh,
agree the rock and export, uh,
citrus export plan then last year,
which would be commencing.
So I look forward to, uh, sampling some of
that when it arrives here in New Zealand.
And also the air services agreement
between our two countries.
That's been, been concluded, uh, and sign in shortly.
So, but of course, acknowledge
that there are further opportunities to continue
To announce. 'cause I understand
New Zealand has, has other priorities
that I can understand.
But we live in a globalized world,
and I think that relationships can be at different levels
and for different reasons.
And, uh, and I'm certain that there are areas
that we can explore.
And Morocco is always keen to diversify
and to, uh, seek new partners
and, uh, south south cooperation, I can talk to you about
what Morocco's doing in the Pacific, for example.
So it, there's a lot to talk about.
We have been cooperating a lot
with the Pacific in the past, uh, decade.
So, uh, talk a bit more about that. Yes,
Very good. Uh,
yes. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah, I, uh, I'd be interested to hear about that.
Your, what you're doing in the Pacific.
What we're doing, we, we, um, we,
we signed a roadmap in 2015 with the, with the Pacific
and, uh, the roadmap with, uh, actions that we, uh,
implement, uh, in assisting them, for example,
in climate change fisheries,
because you know how the, the, the, the small ports,
how we help them because we win.
It's our experience also.
That's why we promote south South cooperation
and, uh, renewable energies
and training, training their diplomats.
We offer them scholarships to go
and study in Morocco, which, which countries together.
Uh, I have, I have, uh, nine countries, P
and g, Fiji, NAAU, Samoa, Solomon Islands.
Uh, I don't know if I forgot something else,
but, uh, yeah, I have nine.
But we do it with more because I have my other colleagues
who cover from the Philippines.
So yes, there is, so it's something that,
it could be a triangular cooperation that could be, uh,
something we can explore. Very
Good. Can I, can I
just say, look, thank you
and congratulations, uh, for,
for well producing a renewable biodegradable, but enduring,
Um, yes. It's Moroccan
leather. Moroccan leather is very well known.
It smells a little bit, you can smell the leather.
Yes, it should. But it, it will, it will, you know, subside
with, with, with time. Yes.
It's really great. Thank. Alright,
we'll end it there. But thank you very much.
Thank you very much for having me.
And I, I'll leave you my, my card
and please, I hope to hear from you.
And what I would also like to see is if you can, um,
maybe think of, uh, telling the delegation,
the parliamentary delegation tomorrow
On the International Treaty examination of the agreement
to establish the Pacific Resilience Facility.
Uh, we have three submitters we'll be hearing from today.
The first is Council for International Development.
We have them present. Excellent.
Please come up to the table. Uh,
so we have received your, uh, submission
and you have 10 minutes set down for the hearing today.
If you'd like to start with introduction, uh,
and then if you have some opening comments
to make in regards to your submissions, welcome that.
And I'm sure there the ions from members. Thank you. Good
Morning.
Um, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, that committee members that, um, my name is Todd Cle.
I'm the Executive Director of the Council
for International Development, um, and I'm joined by Mr.
Sam London, our standards and humanitarian manager.
Um, I'm pleased to joining to discuss
that the Pacific Resilience Fund, uh, facility
and to place it within the broader context
of New Zealand's development engagement.
Uh, our core message today is twofold, strong support
for the facility, but also the importance
of New Zealand's contribution, not be, um, made
through the existing ODA envelope.
Enhancing climate to resilience across Pacifica is vital
to wider regional stability
and to New Zealand's border, uh,
international humanitarian goals.
However, funding it within the facility will simply involve
shifting pressures around the system
and comes at a time of greater concerns from wider ODA cuts.
Uh, the Council for International Development is New
Zealand's peak body for international, uh, development
and humanitarian NGOs.
Our membership spans, um, large well-known, uh,
organizations as well as small specialists NGOs
that often work very, very closely
with partners across Pacific Asia, Africa, and beyond.
Um, we also work closely
with the Pacific Islands Association of NGOs known as Pang o
um, SIDS counterpart in the Pacific,
which represents 13 civil society peak bodies, all
with their own diverse membership.
It was actually with, um, when in partnership with Pang
that we made our written submission.
Um, since membership is diverse,
but what binds 'em is a commitment to principled
and effective, uh, development
and a long history of the coalface of development,
um, initiatives.
Everything from health, education, economic development,
as well as, um, mitigating
and responding to natural disasters and climate change.
Uh, the work is grounded in deep trusted relationships
that have been built over time with Pacific Civil Societies,
churches, communities, uh, and local authorities.
These relationships means mean that NGOs can, uh,
respond quite flexibly and quickly, um, in times of trouble.
And also that, that their work is locally informed
and grounded in the Pacific, like elsewhere.
Resilience not is not only built through infrastructure
and systems, but through people connections, organizations
and social networks.
NGOs are often the bridge between the high level initiatives
and then the on the ground realities in villages,
communities, and outer islands.
Our members also complement
and strengthen the New Zealand government's efforts, um,
and the Pacific through the delivery of ODA, um,
funded initiatives.
This funding plus significant member, um, sourced funding
supports a very broad scope of work from access
to clean water, food security,
disease prevention, skills development.
It's about schools, hospitals, villages, and businesses.
Um, they're also respond often the responding very,
very quickly in times of disaster.
And many of our organizations, sorry, a number
of our organizations are central, uh, to the pre-positioning
of critical supplies across the Pacific.
Also for New Zealand and Pacific Country,
with deep social connections across the region,
our prosperity and security is premised on having a safe
and stable Pacific.
For all these reasons, the Council
for International Development strongly supports the
establishment of the Pacific Resilience Facility
and New Zealand's early and constructive participation.
We see the facilities a timely initiative
that aligns closely with Pacific priorities,
particularly on ownership and community led approaches.
We see this not only as a climate mechanism,
climate finance mechanism, we see it
as a cost effective investment in the regional stability.
We particularly welcome emphasis on Pacific leadership
governance and localization for this to see, um,
succeed in practice.
Pacific organizations must have realistic access to funding
with proportionate accountability
and safeguarding systems that enable rather than, uh,
obstruct delivery for our own members, many
of whom are already, um, significantly involved
in resilience initiatives.
They have a crucial role to play as well.
It's key that they're able to partner
with Pacific organizations through the facility, uh,
to help build capability
and support long-term sustainability.
Uh, but at this time it's key to register to, particularly
to this select committee that the global Fi humanitarian
development sector is going through a period
of significant stress.
Um, we're seeing major donors that,
particularly the United States, but also United Kingdom
and France and many others, um,
significantly reduce the ODA spend
and reprioritize funding around the globe.
We expect the, the impacts of this
to be more evident in the Pacific as a number
of existing programs, um, completed.
So in the shrinking global aid environment,
Pacific countries will face increasing competition
for diminishing resources precisely at time where climate,
health, economic pressures
across the region are intensifying.
As a sector, we strongly encourage the government to ensure
that New Zealand's contribution is funded through new
and additional resources.
Reallocating merely shifts the pressure around the system
in practical terms of funding within the existing envelope,
slowing the number of health initiatives,
disaster preparedness programs, et cetera,
are being delivered through other mechanisms.
This matters not only from a development perspective,
but also from a national interest.
One, as other donors retreat
and aid flows, tighten, uh, strategic vacuums may emerge.
The Pacific is facing, escalated
and interconnected challenges from natural disasters,
economic stress and health, um,
and security such as the very, very deeply troubling
increase in HIV alongside the, alongside the growing reach
of, uh, transnational crime.
This should be a concern to New Zealand,
to regional partners, and to you.
In closing, the Pacific Resilience Facility is positive
and significant initiative that presents a real opportunity
to strengthen Pacific resilience.
But the decisions around ODA levels in the Pacific now need
to be made with, um, eyes open, open to the shifting con,
um, context of global ODA cuts that will start
to impact on the Pacific region.
And this environment development assistance is not
discretionary spending is a strategic
investment in New Zealand's future.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much for that.
And do we have questions for C
Um, yeah. Uh, Kira,
thank you very much
for your, for your presentation.
Um, and, and so I just sort of wanted to
make sure I hear what you're saying.
So you, you support, you support the Pacific, uh,
resilience facility, uh,
but you want the ODA envelope to be either larger
or for it to be funded from somewhere else?
Yeah, and certainly so, yes, correct that we,
we very much support the facility, uh,
but we, uh, in the context of
what we are seeing going on globally, um,
I think there needs to be a realization a lot
of other donors, particularly those from the,
the Northern Hemisphere
and making critical choices about
where they're spending their idea.
Uh, and New Zealand needs to be very cognizant
of the choices that it makes within this our neighborhood.
So to that degree, yes, we would like, um, sort of this
to be funded through additional new
Resources. Uh, and just,
um, thank you. That's nice and clear.
Uh, and, uh, you were talking about a whole lot of other,
uh, in, uh, initiative issues that are arising.
And I, I've heard it from a number
of people at the rise of HIV.
Uh, other issues as well.
Um, in your, in your mind, what are the, what are the kind
of urgent issues that need to be addressed?
Um, which something like this could, could do? Uh,
Um, so the, the, so resilience facilities obviously sort
of more around the, the climate, um,
related activities and initiatives.
Um, so if I separate the, the, the two, uh, we,
we are certainly seeing, um, worrying signs around, uh,
the sustainability of more isolated communities
and with concerns.
And I know that this has been sort of discussed,
discussed across the sector, uh,
that people might end up migrating away, um, from villages
for sustainability, economic reasons,
and all of a sudden we have larger concentrations in urban
centers that, that come there
with their own, their own trouble.
So the facility itself is absolutely important in being able
to maintain that stability
and sort of allow sort of, um,
phased measured economic growth.
Uh, the HIV one I think is really concerning
that on the basis that, uh, the potential for this
to shift across the Pacific quite quickly.
Uh, and so, uh, certainly with, uh, we know
that New Zealand authorities are already focused on
transnational crime, but it is at that community level,
this is playing out.
And so it's not just a, a security issue,
it's about helping the communities
and being able to manage the situation.
Very good. Alright. Thank you very much
for coming in this morning and speaking to your submission.
Really appreciate you taking the time
to give your thoughts on
that Pacific Resilience Fund. Thank
You very much.
All right, members, our second submission is from
Peace Movement outa.
Are they present? They're online. Wonderful. All right.
Bring them in. Thank you.
Yep. Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
Absolutely. Thank you very much for taking your time.
Uh, if you'd like to start with an introduction,
then speak to your submission.
You're most welcome. We have 10 minutes
set down for you today.
We have received, uh, your written submission already.
I'm sure members will have questions as well. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, my name is Edwina Hughes
and I'm the coordinator of Peace Movement.
Um, thank you for the opportunity
to make a submission on this treaty.
Examine, uh, sorry for this International treaty
examination, which covers issues that have been a focus
of our work for many years, particularly
around climate justice for our Pacific neighbors.
We are strongly supportive of the establishment
of the Pacific Resilience Fund and for, uh, sorry, facility
and for New Zealand to provide financial
and other support for it as determined
by Pacific Island Nations,
we trust the committee is fully aware
of the existential threat to Pacific peoples due
to the climate crisis, a crisis
that Pacific peoples are not responsible for yet.
They're among those most impacted by rising sea levels
and increasingly extreme weather events.
We have read the, we, sorry,
we read the National Interest Analysis with great interest
and strongly support New Zealand having undertaken not
to receive financial benefit from the PRF.
We're in general agreement
with the National Interest Analysis positive analysis
around New Zealand ratifying the agreement,
although we have some concerns about the way forward.
As I've briefly summarize now, firstly,
while we support the analysis of how New Zealand
strategic development
and foreign policy interests will benefit from New Zealand
joining the PRF,
we have some concerns about the comments
outlined in our written submission.
The PRF is supposed to be a Pacific owned
and LED initiative, and it would not be appropriate
for New Zealand to prioritize its own agenda either in the
establishing doc documents
or in how the agreement is implemented going forward.
Secondly, while it is great
that New Zealand has pledged 20 million to the PRF,
we are concerned by the proposal
to a dispersing New Zealand's contribution
because it is crucial that the PF is sufficiently resourced
to begin its work as soon as possible.
Related to this, we note that while Pacific communities
and leaders have repeatedly stated
that climate change is the existential threats
of the region, new Zealand's focus is on more militarization
action and climate finance generally, the total AL
allocation for including all of its work,
its official development assistance
and climate finance, less than one third
of New Zealand's military spending each year.
And that figure dropped to one sixth last year, given
discrepancy between New Zealand's military spending
and the $20 million pledge for the PRF,
it would be entirely appropriate for New Zealand
to make a more generous con contribution
to the PRF from the outset
and also to guarantee further funding into the future.
And we support the comments, um,
on the previous submitters from CID about this being new
funding rather than coming from an existing
overseas development assistance funding.
And thirdly, we drew attention to the committee's attention
to the paragraph in the National interest analysis on
who would represent New Zealand on the PRF Council
following ratification.
Given the community centered nature of the P f's purposes
and objectives, we strongly recommend
that New Zealand be represented by a minister with knowledge
and experience of committee of, sorry,
of Pacific communities, of the impacts
of the climate emergency
and of appropriate community resilience measures
as permitted under Article seven B of the agreement.
And finally, we noted that while it is positive that
consulted with, as they're supposed, there does not appear
to have been any consultation with
or iwi Maori in line with the crown's obligations under
or despite strategic policy
and stated ongoing commitment
to deliver on its ity obligations.
And its recognition of
that Maori have strong interest in New Zealand's
international engagement, including environmental issues,
which is clearly relates to.
And then in section C of our written submission,
we summarized our recommendations
that New Zealand ratified the PRF agreement
that New Zealand commits to focusing on the needs
and interest of Pacific Island nations
and affected communities rather than its own agenda in
relation to the PR that New Zealand does not delay
dispersing its 20 million pledge for the PRF,
but instead makes a more generous immediate contribution,
as well as guaranteeing future funding in this year's budget
that a minister with appropriate Pacific climate crisis
and community knowledge
and experience represent New Zealand on the PRF council
following, and
that this committee reminds emfa of its obligations
to consult with Hapu and iwi on international agreements.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you for that.
Edwina, do we have questions?
Tiano? Uh, uh, I,
I agree with your point around, um, the difference between,
uh, this kind of spending and,
and, uh, and military spending.
And, and I was wondering if you had thoughts about
what the appropriate level should be, uh, in terms of, uh,
the contrast that you made earlier?
Yes. Military spending. Yeah. Yeah.
I think, uh, yeah, I mean, this is, um, this is a, um,
a wider issue that we've, um, spoken
with the committee about before.
It's like, you know, it depends on how New Zealand wants
to relate to communities in other parts of the world,
and particularly in relation to the Pacific
as our nearest neighbors, right?
And so, you know, I mean, the, it turned out, um,
when the budget figures were released last year,
that 9 billion had been spent on, on,
sorry, uh, there was 9 billion of military spending
and then a further 5.7 allocated
for this year's annual spend, right?
And then if you contrast that with,
with diplomacy international, um,
overseas development assistance, climate financing,
and all of those things, surely it's better for that
for New Zealand to relate to communities
and other parts of the world
and the Pacific through those measures rather than
through increasing militarization.
And I mean, it's very, very clear what Pacific leaders
and communities have said they see the climate emergency
as the existential threat to the region.
So New Zealand has to listen to that or should be,
So sorry. Did you have
a figure in mind for
what New Zealand should contribute to the PRF
More generously?
We don't have an exact figure in mind,
but yeah, it's clear in our supervision.
Okay. More generously. Thank you. That's
Fine. Uh, honorable Damien
O'Connor. Uh,
Look, thank you very much. Thanks
for the submission.
Um, I guess my question is around, um,
and Pacific leaders, um, don't all think the same way.
And so the issue of accountability for this
and ensuring that indeed any additional funding
that comes from New Zealand goes into long-term strategic
investments, um,
because in my view, the absence of investment and, and wind
and solar and, and other to kind of shift away from, um,
from hydrocarbon dependence in the Pacific over many years
shows that we don't always have the right decision
making within the Pacific.
And so when we boost some of this, it's not some
patronizing approach,
but it's one of actually ensuring
that New Zealand's taxpayers money
is actually delivering on our best intentions.
Are you confident that that will occur with the autonomy
that this fund will now deliver?
That's really up to, to Pacific leaders, not
for New Zealand to be setting parameters around.
This is the thing. If New Zealand joins the Pacific
Resilience Facility, the agreement clearly states
that it's a Pacific LED initiative,
and the priority is about in place adaptation measures so
that effective communities in the Pacific have resilience
to stay where they are, which is obviously the clearly
preferred option, if that's possible.
So that's not about long necessarily long term
strategic interest.
It may require immediate community funding
and then midterm and longer.
But really, if this is to be a Pacific resilience facility,
there's specific leaders who have to make those decisions.
It's not, in our view, new Zealand's place
to dictate what they should be.
Thank you. Do you not consider New Zealand
to be a Pacific, uh, country in terms of contributing
to the importance of what happens in the region
In that sense, yes.
But New Zealand isn't a small Pacific Island nation.
No. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah. Agree,
Disagree compared to some of the others, correct.
But in, in a larger context, I would disagree. Yeah.
Um, and I guess you know the question as well.
If we are playing a leadership role, then that helps
to provide, uh, certainty
and confidence to those nations as well.
All right. Look, thank you very much
for your submission and the recommendations.
Appreciate it. Thank
You. Good
up.
Okay. And our final submission today is from Pillar nz.
You'd like to join us? Set the table. Thank you. Hello.
Good morning. How are you doing? Very well.
How Are you? Yeah, I living the dream.
Thank for having us. All right.
Hey, thanks for, uh, making effort to come in today,
guys, really appreciate it.
We have received your written submission, uh,
and we welcome your contribution today, as
with the others 10 minutes.
Um, welcome time for questions.
If you can give us some at the end. Cool.
And I have to you for introductions and comments.
Yeah. So my name's Nathan.
I'm the executive director of Pillar.
This is Aria, head of gun relations. And, uh, partnerships.
We're a civil based organization here in New Zealand focused
on freedom of speech, thought, conscience, inquiry,
but also privacy and foreign interference.
Uh, as a Samoan qe myself, there's a,
a topic especially special to me and, and, and,
and of interest to me and having witnessed
and effects of what's happening right now in, in the Pacific
and more, more further abroad.
But specifically in the Pacific, I think we have some, uh,
some support for the bill and that we'd like to express.
So I hand over to my colleague and he will
Present. Thank you.
Uh, as we noted in our submission,
we are generally in support
of the establishment of the facility.
Uh, and I'll just spend some time speaking to that.
Uh, as Nathan mentioned, since our inception, one
of our key campaigns has been focused on the issue
of foreign interference.
Uh, we see it as a major threat to our liberal institutions
and our democratic institutions, both, both in New Zealand,
but also, uh, abroad in the Pacific.
Uh, I will note just, uh, generally speaking,
this is particularly from the Chinese Communist Party,
but we are speaking about foreign
interference, uh, generally.
Uh, it has also just been, uh, encouraging
to see the government and the public service
increasingly account for this.
Uh, and we hope that this continues.
Uh, but, uh, more, more specifically, as you'd be aware,
New Zealand security as an Island nation is closely linked
to the security of, uh, our Pacific partners.
This has been affirmed by one
of the most recent national security strategy documents
that have come out in recent years.
Uh, and interestingly,
that document draw draws a very close relationship
between climate resilience and also, uh, stability
and security in the Pacific.
And so we believe that protecting New Zealand from threats
that would do us harm, uh, means safeguarding a peaceful
and resilient and independent Pacific.
Uh, and we believe, uh, that this facility, uh,
facilitates greater investment
and obviously local communities and
and development projects.
Uh, and so in, in, in light of that, uh,
we think this is important our, and, uh,
and support, uh,
strengthening the long-term
environmental security of Pacific Nations.
And we think therefore their general, uh, security,
national security, uh, is a critical deterrent
to foreign interference specific
and then, uh, further down, uh, to New Zealand.
Uh, and, and that's specifically noted in article three of,
of the agreement, which looks at the idea
of development more broadly, uh, as well
as obviously the climate related stuff,
but also, uh, development.
Uh, uh, and in particular, we think, uh,
that New Zealand's obviously signed up to the 2050, uh,
blue Pacific Continent strategy.
Uh, and there's seven pillars in that.
And, and three of those pillars are around, uh, stability,
regionalism, uh, and development.
Uh, and this play plays an important role in, in achieving,
uh, that agreement, which we've already signed up to, uh,
as I I noted the Chinese Communist Party, uh, earlier,
and I'll speak specifically to that as well.
Um, we believe that obviously environmental disasters are,
are a threat, and if they do occur, they,
they leave these nations vulnerable to opportunistic
and coercive, uh, threats, uh, who have much
to gain in the Pacific, uh, more explicitly.
Uh, and recently as we've seen growing influence
and investment from the C CCP in the region,
both at the national level,
but also, uh, at the local government level with, uh,
sister, sister city relationships, uh, being built, uh,
we've seen, uh, China's dual use facilities, uh,
in the Pacific, which serve obviously a civilian purpose,
but also, uh, uh, for, for military purposes.
And, and the hearts, their, uh, military's ability to,
to project their power.
Uh, and you would also, we would be very well aware of,
of their interests, uh, uh, in, in our country.
Uh, and obviously we've had warnings from the US
that suggest that China, uh,
is waging a sustained influence campaign aimed at weakening
democratic institutions
and strategic alignment on the Pacific.
Uh, and that's also relevant to some
of the earliest submissions that we heard about, uh,
transnational crime, as well as, uh, the, the interference
that they have, uh, more examples are in,
in the written submission.
But all in all, it's against this background
that we stand in support, uh, of the agreement
as a practical mechanism among other measures, uh, uh,
to strengthen New Zealand's regional partnerships
and counter, uh, foreign interference
and influence in China's increasingly aside
of behavior in the Pacific.
Uh, Pacific nations, including New Zealand,
must be empowered to exercise full sovereignty, uh,
over their territories
and become, we believe, uh, progressively less reliant
on external partners.
Uh, we do hope that they become independent, uh,
democratic liberal nations.
Uh, and so we,
and we do think that that's, uh, in,
in New Zealand's best interest, uh, that they be this way,
uh, independent, secure,
sovereign democratic partners for the long term.
Uh, and obviously our recommendations are, are noted, uh,
there, but we think that we should, uh,
having secured a seat, uh, on the board
and on the council, uh, that we should, uh,
have a guiding vision and,
and lobby hard to, to sustain, uh, uh, independent Pacific.
Uh, and so, yeah, we'd be happy to take questions on that.
Excellent. Very good. Uh, first question, Tim Coston.
Yeah, I found it really interesting.
Um, I thought it was a really good submission, so thank you.
We, we heard from some other submitters, uh,
almost hoping New Zealand would take a bit
of a step back from active involvement in the Pacific.
Not having a, a seat at the table was the quote, one of the,
um, submissions.
Uh, you know,
and you yourselves have sort of, uh, reflected some
of the things we've seen with other countries having an
influence when there's a vacuum.
Yes. Uh, maybe an influence that we don't think is positive.
So I was just really keen to hear and
and that context, how important is it
that New Zealand actually does take a leadership role?
Oh, uh, uh, we, we think it's critically important.
Uh, there's a saying that nature hates a vacuum,
and we know that there's other countries
who are involved in this, uh, agreement
and are putting money in there, uh,
significantly less money than the New Zealanders.
Uh, China's contributed I think 500,000, uh,
whereas we're giving 20 million.
Yeah. And so I think it would be silly at, at best if,
if we put in money and then take a step back.
So, uh, I think it would be wisest to, to,
to take a strong
Leadership position. I mean, NA
Nathan, isn't it? Yeah. Yeah.
And you, I mean, you, uh, Pacifica Kiwi mm-hmm.
As, I mean, you, you I think have maybe a right to speak
for Pacifica more than some.
Mm-hmm. Um, how, how, how do you think New Zealand is,
is valued in that leadership role in Pacific?
Yeah. I think the Pacific is extremely
complex in one sense, where there's much tradition, uh,
and cultural differences between our nations.
Politically though they are trying
to shift into a more modern, uh, system.
And we see that with the likes of the amount
of immigration that comes to New Zealand.
My dad was an immigrant who came here for the opportunities,
afforded him by democracy.
And as a result, I was blessed enough
to live in this country, grew up here traveling back
to Samo over the last few years.
And, and even from my first trip when I was maybe seven,
there was dirt roads, then there was paved roads,
then there was shacks and there was glass buildings.
And all of them have Chinese names on them.
All of them have Chinese writing. Yeah.
And it's infrastructure that to the iron might seem, uh,
like development, but it's cheap
infrastructure and it's dodgy money.
Now, I don't want to go out and generalize too, too broadly,
but the Pacific needs a guiding hand here.
That is one that values western liberal
democracy and individual rights.
If we leave that vacuum, it would be easily, easily abused
by those who would've totalitarianism
and author authoritarian ideas.
And because that is what we see happen when, uh,
we leave these nations to stand alone,
we give them the resources.
We might give 'em a little bit of encouragement
and a push from a distance, but, but,
but it doesn't serve them well for us
to then just let them sink.
It's not about giving them handouts
or babying them or infantilizing them.
It's about strengthening democracy across the Pacific
through partnership, not through parenting.
And we can eventually see a stronger
Pacific if we do this properly.
Well said. Thank you. Very Good.
Alright, look, we are out of time, unfortunately.
Thank you very much for that submission grace submission Mr.
Costley said, and your comments in relation to that today.
Uh, very much appreciate as well. Thank you so much.
Just.